#summary Describes the text file format for animal behavior.

= Behavior data file format specification =


== Naming ==

A behavior data file name must have a *.bhv* extension.  


== Structure ==

It's an ASCII encoded text file with a series of lines, each containing a three values separated by commas. A value representation can't contain a comma.

{{{ <A>, <B>, <S> }}}

  * `<S>`: a string. Leading and trailing spaces are ignored.
  * `<A>`, `<B>`: string representation of floating point numbers as described [http://download.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/lang/Double.html#valueOf(java.lang.String) in this format], where `Double.valueOf(<B>) < Double.valueOf(<C>)`.

If `<Ax>` and `<Bx>` are the values of `<A>` and `<B>` at line `x` then, 
for every `i` and `j`, where `i < j`, `Double.valueOf(<Bi>) < Double.valueOf(<Aj>)`.


== Meaning ==

Data files in this format contain information about observed animal behavior in an experiment. The behavior model consists of a relation
between the set of _time intervals_ (`[a,b]`) and a set of _tags_. Each
tag represents one of the possible animal behaviors observed during the
experiment (ex: sleeping, walking, playing with ball, eating, etc.). 

The behavior data file encodes that relation. Each line is a member pair, where `[<A>,<B>]` is the time interval (in seconds) and `<S>` is the tag. Each line meaning is that during the specified time interval, the observed behavior of the animal was `<S>`.


== Example ==

{{{
3630, 3631, ball
3684, 3699, ball
3719, 3720, ball
3738, 3740, ball
3753, 3754, ball
3781, 3800, ball
3610, 3617, brush
3642, 3648, brush
3668, 3672, brush
3703, 3714, brush
3760, 3763, brush
3803, 3805, brush
3999, 4000, brush
4123, 4125, brush
4320, 4328, brush
3623, 3630, urchin
3632, 3637, urchin
3681, 3682, urchin
3741, 3752, urchin
3754, 3758, urchin
3617, 3621, food
3639, 3641, food
3648, 3661, food
3673, 3674, food
3715, 3717, food
3764, 3778, food
3806, 3987, food
4008, 4118, food
4128, 4225, food
4237, 4319, food
4339, 4706, food
4712, 4754, food
}}}